Wheat is the world’s most important grain crop.  Wheat is important not only for its nutritional value, but also for its gluten content.  Gluten is the protein of the wheat which, when properly developed by kneading, will trap and hold the yeast gas in the bread dough causing the bread to rise.  Wheat is the only grain with the proper amount of gluten to facilitate the rising of bread dough to make light, soft loaves.

There are two basic categories of wheat, hard wheat and soft wheat.  Hard wheat is grown in cool, dry climates, either in the winter or the spring.  Dry winters and springs make the protein, or gluten, content high, and the moisture content low.  A high gluten content is necessary to make yeast breads.  Hard wheat is named for the season it is grown (i.e. hard winter wheat or hard spring wheat).

Soft wheat, known as pastry flour, can not be used for making yeast breads.  It is grown in wetter regions or is irrigated.  The moisture content is high, making the gluten content too low for the proper rising of yeast breads.  It is excellent for making cakes, cookies, or, pastries.  The wheat grown in southern states is soft wheat, which probably explains why the South was known for its biscuits and cornbread, while the cold northern states had yeast bread.

There are also two varieties of wheat, red or white.  These can be grown in the winter or the spring.  Red wheat is typically much more flavorful, having that distinctive “nutty” whole wheat taste.  White wheat, on the other hand, is very mild in flavor and a light golden color when baked, hence the name, Golden 86, for one white wheat variety.

I generally prefer the full flavor of the red wheat for most of my bread baking.  I do, however, prefer the milder flavor of the white wheat for pizza crust or breads filled with onions, herbs, meat, or cheese.  I have specified in the recipes which variety of wheat I use if I have a preference.

Durum wheat is used for making pasta.  Semolina is flour made from durum wheat with the bran and germ removed. 


Wheat is grown on more land area than any other food crop (220.4 million hectares, 2014). World trade in wheat is greater than for all other crops combined. In 2016, world production of wheat was 749 million tonnes, making it the second most-produced cereal after maize. Since 1960, world production of wheat and other grain crops has tripled and is expected to grow further through the middle of the 21st century. 

Globally, wheat is the leading source of vegetal protein in human food, having a protein content of about 13%, which is relatively high compared to other major cereals and staple foods.

When eaten as the whole grain, wheat is a source of multiple nutrients and dietary fiber, and is associated with lower risk of several diseases, including coronary heart disease, stroke, cancer and type 2 diabetes.
